# Mental Health Resources

Graduate and Professional Student Assistance Specialist: The Graduate
School and the Dean of Students Office jointly support a staff
position focused on graduate student needs.  [Elaine
Goetz-Berman](mailto:egoetz2@wisc.edu?subject=Graduate%20student%20mental%20health)
serves in this role, which includes support, advocacy, and resource
referral for graduate students.  Elaine’s approach to working with
graduate students centers on her specialized knowledge about the
unique academic and personal challenges they face.

### University Health Services

UHS offers a safe and confidential environment with a variety of
support services available free of charge and open to all graduate
students.  These include
[individual](https://www.uhs.wisc.edu/mental-health/individual/),
[couple/partner](https://www.uhs.wisc.edu/mental-health/couple-partner/),
and group counseling, as well as [stress
management](https://www.uhs.wisc.edu/wellness/stress/) and [psychiatry
services](https://www.uhs.wisc.edu/mental-health/psychiatry/).

UHS employs Access Consultation phone screening to replace the drop-in
triage system.  Students can call 608-265-5600 or log in to
[MyUHS](https://myuhs.uhs.wisc.edu/login_dualauthentication.aspx) for
24-hour appointment booking.  There are also a limited number of
drop-in appointments available every day at UHS if a student needs
immediate access to UHS.  If there is a risk of suicide or concern
about well-being of a student, call [UHS 24-hour crisis
service](https://www.uhs.wisc.edu/mental-health/crisis/) to speak with
an on-call counselor at 608-265-5600, option 9.  If a situation is
immediately life threatening, call 911.

In addition, UHS hosts a variety of [group counseling
opportunities](https://www.uhs.wisc.edu/mental-health/group-counseling/schedule/):

+ Dissertators’ Group (Wednesdays 12:00-1:30pm) - A supportive group
environment focused on the emotional, behavioral, and organizational
challenges associated with the dissertation process.

+ Graduate Students’ Group (Mondays 10:00am-11:30am; Thursdays
2:45-4:15pm) - This group examines the sources of stress, ways of
coping, and the role of peer support in adjusting to a role that often
feels like it’s 24/7 as a graduate student.

+ Graduate Women’s Group (Fridays 3:00-4:30pm) - Through offering
support to others and receiving support, group members are
challenged to learn about themselves, initiate change, and exercise honesty in a safe space.  

+ Graduate Student Process and Support Group (Tuesdays 2:00-3:00pm) -
Graduate students will receive support around common stressors related
to academics (“imposter syndrome,” work/life balance, anxiety),
connect around shared experiences, and give and
receive feedback that can help build greater self-awareness.  

+ Multicultural Graduate Student Support Group - New as of summer 2019,
this group meets to discuss weekly topics selected by group members. A
licensed mental health therapist from UHS who is a person of color
facilitates these bi-weekly meetings. This is a gently facilitated,
non-therapeutic support group. [Read more about the group
here](https://grad.wisc.edu/diversity/multicultural-graduate-network/#events).

The groups listed above are just a few examples.  [Additional
groups](https://www.uhs.wisc.edu/mental-health/group-counseling/schedule/)
address students of color, LGBTQ support, relationships, depression,
anxiety, and other topics.  Groups typically meet one to two hours
weekly, and may run from four to 12 weeks per semester.  These groups
fill up very quickly, so students should enroll in these groups at the
beginning of the semester.

Additional UHS Resources Include:

+ [Let’s Talk](https://www.uhs.wisc.edu/mental-health/lets-talk/) – UHS
offers drop-in consultations at locations around campus.  It’s free,
no appointment is necessary, and students are seen on a first-come,
first-served basis.

+ [Wellness Initiatives](https://www.uhs.wisc.edu/wellness/) – UHS’s
interdisciplinary program is designed to assist students’ pursuit of
healthy mind, body, and spirit.  Programs address healthy living,
nutritional counseling, mindfulness, exercise consultation, yoga,
massage, stress management, and more.  Example sessions include
(advance registration required): o Let’s Yoga: Mondays 4:00-4:50 (333
E. Campus Mall, 4213 Student Activity Center); Fridays 10:00-10:50am
(Red Gym, Multicultural Student Center) o Meditation: Tuesdays
12:00-12:45pm (21 N. Park St, Room 7045); Wednesdays 12:00-12:45pm
(Union South, see TITU) o Massage Therapy: By appointment, 50-minute
massages for $40

+ [Support for student military
veterans](https://www.uhs.wisc.edu/news/campus/student-veterans/) –
Student veterans transitioning to civilian life face unique
challenges.  UHS has counselors who are veterans themselves and
counselors who are familiar with the needs of veterans.

+ [Sexual Violence Prevention
Program](https://www.uhs.wisc.edu/prevention/violence-prevention/grad-students/) -
UHS provides an online violence prevention program, which all incoming
graduate students at UW-Madison are required to complete.

+ [Survivor Services](https://www.uhs.wisc.edu/survivor/) – Survivor
Services provides confidential support for students who have
experienced sexual assault, sexual harassment, intimate partner
violence, and/or stalking. Services include information and referral,
individual and group counseling, and advocacy and
accompaniments. Survivor Services holds drop-in Open Access hours
during the semester located on the 8th floor of UHS (333 E. Campus
Mall). Hours are M/T/W 1:00-4:00pm, and Th/F 9:00am-12:00pm. Survivor
Services also offers [support
groups](https://www.uhs.wisc.edu/prevention/violence-prevention/survivor-support-group/).

Additional support and resources on campus include:

### [UWell](http://uwell.wisc.edu/)
 This is a comprehensive wellness initiative aiming to advance the
health and wellbeing of the entire campus community by promoting
existing resources.  

### Dean of Students Office
This office is committed to fostering a caring environment for all
students.  Responsibilities include the Student of Concern Report, the
Bias Reporting Process, addressing Sexual Assault, Dating, and
Domestic Violence, as well as many other issues affecting student
wellbeing.  Drop-in hours are Monday through Friday 8:30am-4:00pm,
room 70 Bascom Hall.

### [Ombuds Office](https://ombuds.wisc.edu/)
University employees, including graduate students, can seek guidance
regarding workplace concerns without fear
of reprisal and at no cost to them.    

### [Employee Assistance Office](https://hr.wisc.edu/employee-assistance-office/)
Graduate students who hold assistantships are eligible to utilize the
Employee Assistance Office.  This is a confidential resource that
provides counseling and consultation at no cost.

In addition to utilizing UHS’s services, you might also refer graduate
students who hold assistantship appointments to seek mental health
services covered by their [health insurance
plan](https://www.ohr.wisc.edu/benefits/new-emp/grad.aspx).
